## WPLoader module

A module to load WordPress and make its code available in tests.

Depending on the value of the `loadOnly` configuration parameter, the module will behave differently:

* `loadOnly: false` - The module will load WordPress like [the Core PHPUnit suite][1] does to run integration tests in a
  controlled environment. Use the module in this mode with test cases generated
  using [the `generate:wpunit` command](./../commands.md#generatewpunit).
* `loadOnly: true` - The module will load WordPress to make it available in the context of tests. Use the module in this
  mode in [Cest][2], [Cept][3] and Codeception unit test cases.

## Configuration with loadOnly: false

The module will load WordPress like [the Core PHPUnit suite][1] does to run integration tests in a controlled
environment.  
Together with the test case generated by [the `generate:wpunit` command](./../commands.md#generatewpunit) the module
will:

* take care of running any test method in a database transaction rolled back after each test
* manage and clean up the global environment and context between tests

When used in this mode, the module supports the following configuration parameters:

* `loadOnly` - `false` to load WordPress and run tests in a controlled environment.
* `wpRootFolder` - **required**; the path to the WordPress installation root folder. This can be a relative path to the
  codeception root directory, or an absolute path to the WordPress installation directory. The WordPress installation
  directory is the directory that contains the `wp-load.php` file.
* `dbUrl` - **required**; the URL to the database to use to run tests. The URL must be in the form
  `mysql://username:password@host:port/database` to use a MySQL database, or in the form `sqlite://path/to/database` to
  use a SQLite database. Alternatively, you can use the `dbName`, `dbUser`, `dbPassword`, `dbHost` configuration
  parameters to specify the database connection details.
* `dump` - the path to a database dump, or a set of database dumps, to load before running tests. The dump will be
  loaded only once, after the tests run.
* `tablePrefix` - the database table prefix to use when loading WordPress, defaults to `wp_`.
* `multisite` - a boolean value to indicate if WordPress should be loaded and initialized in multisite mode.
* `dbCharset` - the database charset to use when loading WordPress.
* `dbCollate` - the database collate to use when loading WordPress.
* `domain` - the domain to use when loading WordPress. Equivalent to defining the `WP_TESTS_DOMAIN` constant.
* `adminEmail` - the administrator email to use when loading WordPress. Equivalent to defining the `WP_TESTS_EMAIL`
  constant.
* `title` - the site title to use when loading WordPress. Equivalent to defining the `WP_TESTS_TITLE` constant.
* `phpBinary` - the path to the PHP binary to use to run tests. Defaults to the `WP_PHP_BINARY` constant.
* `language` - the language to use when loading WordPress. Equivalent to defining the `WPLANG` constant.
* `configFile` - a configuration file, or a set of configuration files, to load before the tests to further customize
  and control the WordPress testing environment.
* `pluginsFolder` - the path to the plugins folder to use when loading WordPress. Equivalent to defining the
  `WP_PLUGIN_DIR` constant.
* `plugins` - a list of plugins to activate and load in the WordPress installation. Each plugin must be specified in a
  format like `hello.php` or `my-plugin/my-plugin.php` format.
* `bootstrapActions` - a list of actions or callables to call **after** WordPress is loaded and before the tests run.
* `theme` - the theme to activate and load in the WordPress installation. The theme must be specified in slug format
  like
  `twentytwentythree`.
* `AUTH_KEY` - the `AUTH_KEY` constant value to use when loading WordPress. If the `wpRootFolder` path points at a
  configured installation, containing the `wp-config.php` file, then the value of the constant in the configuration file
  will be used, else it will be randomly generated.
* `SECURE_AUTH_KEY` - the `SECURE_AUTH_KEY` constant value to use when loading WordPress. If the `wpRootFolder` path
  points at a configured installation, containing the `wp-config.php` file, then the value of the constant in the
  configuration file will be used, else it will be randomly generated.
* `LOGGED_IN_KEY` - the `LOGGED_IN_KEY` constant value to use when loading WordPress. If the `wpRootFolder` path points
  at a configured installation, containing the `wp-config.php` file, then the value of the constant in the configuration
  file will be used, else it will be randomly generated.
* `NONCE_KEY` - the `NONCE_KEY` constant value to use when loading WordPress. If the `wpRootFolder` path points at a
  configured installation, containing the `wp-config.php` file, then the value of the constant in the configuration file
  will be used, else it will be randomly generated.
* `AUTH_SALT` - the `AUTH_SALT` constant value to use when loading WordPress. If the `wpRootFolder` path points at a
  configured installation, containing the `wp-config.php` file, then the value of the constant in the configuration file
  will be used, else it will be randomly generated.
* `SECURE_AUTH_SALT` - the `SECURE_AUTH_SALT` constant value to use when loading WordPress. If the `wpRootFolder` path
  points at a configured installation, containing the `wp-config.php` file, then the value of the constant in the
  configuration file will be used, else it will be randomly generated.
* `LOGGED_IN_SALT` - the `LOGGED_IN_SALT` constant value to use when loading WordPress. If the `wpRootFolder` path
  points at a configured installation, containing the `wp-config.php` file, then the value of the constant in the
  configuration file will be used, else it will be randomly generated.
* `NONCE_SALT` - the `NONCE_SALT` constant value to use when loading WordPress. If the `wpRootFolder` path points at a
  configured installation, containing the `wp-config.php` file, then the value of the constant in the configuration file
  will be used, else it will be randomly generated.
* `AUTOMATIC_UPDATER_DISABLED` - the `AUTOMATIC_UPDATER_DISABLED` constant value to use when loading WordPress. If
  the `wpRootFolder` path points at a configured installation, containing the `wp-config.php` file, then the value of
  the constant in the configuration file will be used, else it will be randomly generated.
* `WP_HTTP_BLOCK_EXTERNAL` - the `WP_HTTP_BLOCK_EXTERNAL` constant value to use when loading WordPress. If
  the `wpRootFolder` path points at a configured installation, containing the `wp-config.php` file, then the value of
  the constant in the configuration file will be used, else it will be randomly generated.
* `backupGlobals` - a boolean value to indicate if the global environment should be backed up before each test. Defaults to `true`. The globals' backup involves serialization of the global state, plugins or themes that define classes developed to prevent serialization of the global state will cause the tests to fail. Set this parameter to `false` to disable the global environment backup, or use a more refined approach setting the `backupGlobalsExcludeList` parameter below. Note that a test case that is explicitly setting the `backupGlobals` property will override this configuration parameter.
* `backupGlobalsExcludeList` - a list of global variables to exclude from the global environment backup. The list must be in the form of array, and it will be merged to the list of globals excluded by default.
* `backupStaticAttributes` - a boolean value to indicate if static attributes of classes should be backed up before each test. Defaults to `true`. The static attributes' backup involves serialization of the global state, plugins or themes that define classes developed to prevent serialization of the global state will cause the tests to fail. Set this parameter to `false` to disable the static attributes backup, or use a more refined approanch setting the `backupStaticAttributesExcludeList` parameter below. Note that a test case that is explicitly setting the `backupStaticAttributes` property will override this configuration parameter.
* `backupStaticAttributesExcludeList` - a list of classes to exclude from the static attributes backup. The list must be in the form of map from class names to the array of method names to exclude from the backup. See an example below.

This is an example of an integration suite configured to use the module:

```yaml
actor: IntegrationTester
bootstrap: _bootstrap.php
modules:
  enabled:
    - \Helper\Integration
    - lucatume\WPBrowser\Module\WPLoader:
        wpRootFolder: /var/wordpress
        dbUrl: mysql://root:root@mysql:3306/wordpress
        tablePrefix: test_
        domain: wordpress.test
        adminEmail: admin@wordpress.test
        title: 'Integration Tests'
        plugins:
          - hello.php
          - woocommerce/woocommerce.php
          - my-plugin/my-plugin.php
        theme: twentytwentythree
```

The following configuration uses [dynamic configuration parameters][3] to set the module configuration:

```yaml
actor: IntegrationTester
bootstrap: _bootstrap.php
modules:
  enabled:
    - \Helper\Integration
    - lucatume\WPBrowser\Module\WPLoader:
        wpRootFolder: '%WP_ROOT_FOLDER%'
        dbUrl: '%WP_DB_URL%'
        tablePrefix: '%WP_TABLE_PREFIX%'
        domain: '%WP_DOMAIN%'
        adminEmail: '%WP_ADMIN_EMAIL%'
        title: '%WP_TITLE%'
        plugins:
          - hello.php
          - woocommerce/woocommerce.php
          - my-plugin/my-plugin.php
        theme: twentytwentythree
```

The following example configuration uses a SQLite database and loads a database fixture before the tests run:

```yaml
actor: IntegrationTester
bootstrap: _bootstrap.php
modules:
  enabled:
    - \Helper\Integration
    - lucatume\WPBrowser\Module\WPLoader:
        wpRootFolder: /var/wordpress
        dbUrl: sqlite:///var/wordpress/wp-tests.sqlite
        dump:
          - tests/_data/products.sql
          - tests/_data/users.sql
          - tests/_data/orders.sql
        tablePrefix: test_
        domain: wordpress.test
        adminEmail: admin@wordpress.test
        title: 'Integration Tests'
        plugins:
          - hello.php
          - woocommerce/woocommerce.php
          - my-plugin/my-plugin.php
        theme: twentytwentythree
```

The follow example configuration prevents the backup of globals and static attributes in all the tests of the suite that are not explicitly overriding the `backupGlobals` and `backupStaticAttributes` properties:

```yaml
actor: IntegrationTester
bootstrap: _bootstrap.php
modules:
  enabled:
    - \Helper\Integration
    - lucatume\WPBrowser\Module\WPLoader:
        wpRootFolder: /var/wordpress
        dbUrl: sqlite:///var/wordpress/wp-tests.sqlite
        dump:
          - tests/_data/products.sql
          - tests/_data/users.sql
          - tests/_data/orders.sql
        tablePrefix: test_
        domain: wordpress.test
        adminEmail: admin@wordpress.test
        title: 'Integration Tests'
        plugins:
          - hello.php
          - woocommerce/woocommerce.php
          - my-plugin/my-plugin.php
        theme: twentytwentythree
        backupGlobals: false
        backupStaticAttributes: false 
```

The following configuration prevents the backup of *some* globals and static attributes:

```yaml
actor: IntegrationTester
bootstrap: _bootstrap.php
modules:
  enabled:
    - \Helper\Integration
    - lucatume\WPBrowser\Module\WPLoader:
        wpRootFolder: /var/wordpress
        dbUrl: sqlite:///var/wordpress/wp-tests.sqlite
        dump:
          - tests/_data/products.sql
          - tests/_data/users.sql
          - tests/_data/orders.sql
        tablePrefix: test_
        domain: wordpress.test
        adminEmail: admin@wordpress.test
        title: 'Integration Tests'
        plugins:
          - hello.php
          - woocommerce/woocommerce.php
          - my-plugin/my-plugin.php
        theme: twentytwentythree
        backupGlobalsExcludeList:
          - my_plugin_will_explode_on_wakeup
          - another_problematic_global
        backupStaticAttributesExcludeList:
          - MyPlugin\MyClass:
              - instance
              - anotherStaticAttributeThatWillExplodeOnWakeup
          - AnotherPlugin\AnotherClass:
                - instance
                - yetAnotherStaticAttributeThatWillExplodeOnWakeup
```

### Handling a custom site structure

If you're working on a site project using a custom file structure, e.g. [Bedrock][4], you should
use [a custom configuration](./../custom-configuration.md) and, together with that, configure the `WPLoader` module to
load WordPress, plugins and themes code from the correct locations.
Take care to point the `wpRootFolder` parameter to the directory containing the `wp-load.php` file,
the `/var/my-site/web/wp` one in the following example, and the module will read the project configuration file to load
the WordPress code from the correct location.

Here's an example of how the module should be configured to run integration tests on a Bedrock installation:

```yaml
actor: IntegrationTester
bootstrap: _bootstrap.php
modules:
  enabled:
    - \Helper\Integration
    - lucatume\WPBrowser\Module\WPLoader:
        wpRootFolder: /var/my-site/web/wp
        dbUrl: mysql://root:root@mysql:3306/wordpress
        tablePrefix: test_
        domain: my-project.test
        adminEmail: admin@my-project.test
        title: 'Integration Tests'
        plugins:
          - hello.php
          - woocommerce/woocommerce.php
          - my-plugin/my-plugin.php
        theme: twentytwentythree
```

In general, pointing the `wpRootFolder` parameter to the directory containing the `wp-load.php` file should take care of
loading WordPress code from the correct location.
Should that not be the case, use the `configFile` parameter to point the module to the project test configuration file:
a PHP file defining the constants and environment variables to use to load WordPress, plugins and themes correctly.

## Configuration with loadOnly: true

The module will load WordPress from the location specified by the `wpRootFodler` parameter, relying
on [the WPDb module](WPDb.md) to manage the database state.

When used in this mode, the module supports the following configuration parameters:

* `loadOnly` - `true` to load WordPress and make it available in the context of tests.
* `wpRootFolder` - **required**; the path to the WordPress installation root folder. This can be a relative path to the
  codeception root directory, or an absolute path to the WordPress installation directory. The WordPress installation
  directory is the directory that contains the `wp-load.php` file.
* `dbUrl` - **required**; the URL to the database to use to run tests. The URL must be in the form
  `mysql://username:password@host:port/database` to use a MySQL database, or in the form `sqlite://path/to/database` to
  use a SQLite database. Alternatively, you can use the `dbName`, `dbUser`, `dbPassword`, `dbHost` configuration
  parameters to specify the database connection details.
* `domain` - the domain to use when loading WordPress. Equivalent to defining the `WP_TESTS_DOMAIN` constant.

The following is an example of the module configuration to run end-to-end tests on the site served
at `http://localhost:8080` URL and served from the  `/var/wordpress` directory:

```yaml
actor: EndToEndTester
bootstrap: _bootstrap.php
modules:
  enabled:
    - \Helper\Integration
    - lucatume\WPBrowser\Module\WPWebDriver:
        url: 'http://localhost:8080'
        adminUsername: 'admin'
        adminPassword: 'password'
        adminPath: '/wp-admin'
        browser: chrome
        host: 'localhost'
        port: '4444'
        path: '/'
        window_size: false
        capabilities:
          "goog:chromeOptions":
            args:
              - "--headless"
              - "--disable-gpu"
              - "--disable-dev-shm-usage"
              - "--proxy-server='direct://'"
              - "--proxy-bypass-list=*"
              - "--no-sandbox"
    - lucatume\WPBrowser\Module\WPDb:
        dbUrl: 'mysql://root:password@localhost:3306/wordpress'
        url: 'http://localhost:8080'
        tablePrefix: 'wp_'
        dump: 'tests/_data/dump.sql'
        populate: true
        cleanup: true
        reconnect: false
        urlReplacement: true
        originalUrl: http://wordpress.test
        waitlock: 10
        createIfNotExists: true
    - lucatume\WPBrowser\Module\WPLoader:
        loadOnly: true
        wpRootFolder: /var/wordpress
        dbUrl: 'mysql://root:password@localhost:3306/wordpress'
        domain: wordpress.test
```

## Methods

The module provides the following methods:

<!-- methods -->

#### factory
Signature: `factory()` : `lucatume\WPBrowser\Module\WPLoader\FactoryStore`  

Accessor method to get the object storing the factories for things.
This method gives access to the same factories provided by the
[Core test suite](https://make.wordpress.org/core/handbook/testing/automated-testing/writing-phpunit-tests/).

#### getContentFolder
Signature: `getContentFolder([string $path])` : `string`  

Returns the absolute path to the WordPress content directory.

#### getInstallation
Signature: `getInstallation()` : `lucatume\WPBrowser\WordPress\Installation`  


#### getPluginsFolder
Signature: `getPluginsFolder([string $path])` : `string`  

Returns the absolute path to the plugins directory.

The value will first look at the `WP_PLUGIN_DIR` constant, then the `pluginsFolder` configuration parameter
and will, finally, look in the default path from the WordPress root directory.

#### getThemesFolder
Signature: `getThemesFolder([string $path])` : `string`  

Returns the absolute path to the themes directory.

#### getWpRootFolder
Signature: `getWpRootFolder([?string $path])` : `string`  

Returns the absolute path to the WordPress root folder or a path within it..
<!-- /methods -->

[1]: https://make.wordpress.org/core/handbook/testing/automated-testing/phpunit/

[2]: https://codeception.com/docs/AcceptanceTests

[3]: https://codeception.com/docs/AdvancedUsage#Cest-Classes

[4]: https://roots.io/bedrock/
